The mythologies of the trio are implied to be connected, despite having no true relation. The origins of Zekrom and Reshiram are told in legends, as they were once a single powerful Dragon Pokemon used by twin heroes in order to create the Unova region. But the brothers each sought something different in life—truth for the older brother and ideals for the younger—and they began to argue, then fight, over whose side was right. The single dragon, in response, split into two Pokemon: Reshiram, who sided with the older twin, and Zekrom, who sided with the younger twin.
The two dragons were equally matched as they battled and neither conquered the other. As a result, the brothers set aside their differences and equally declared that there was no right side, either. But the sons of the heroes resumed the fight, and Reshiram and Zekrom destroyed the region with their fire and lightning powers. They subsequently disappeared afterward.
At the beginning of Black and White, one of them resides in Dragonspiral Tower, who is called upon by N to create his ideal world. The player is tasked with finding the other dragon in its corresponding stone (Light Stone in Black and Dark Stone in White) and revive it to resolve the history the twins began in the past.
Kyurem's origins were believed to be much different than those of the other two. The third dragon came down to the Pokemon world from an icy meteor and crashed into a place called Giant Chasm. The fact that Star Pieces, Comet Shards and extraterrestrial Pokemon can be found in the Giant Chasm strongly support this theory. An old legend in Lacunosa Town describing Kyurem claims that it would take people and Pokemon away from the town and eat them; this is why the town is now surrounded by a giant wall, and why none of its residents set foot outside their homes after dark.
During Black 2 and White 2 however, an NPC claims that this story of Kyurem's origin might not be totally true. Professor Juniper theorized that the meteorite from the story could have been a Dragon Stone, similar to the ones that Reshiram and Zekrom were revived from. However, Drayden tells the player character of an old legend that tells a conflicting story of Kyurem's origins. The legend says that when the original dragon split into Reshiram and Zekrom, a third dragon was "created" from the leftovers: Kyurem.
The Pokédex entry for Kyurem also states that it is waiting for a hero to fill in the missing parts of its body with "truth or ideals". This is completed in-game with the creation of its alternate forms, White Kyurem and Black Kyurem, created by Kyurem fusing with Reshiram or Zekrom (but not both).
A direct counterpart to the Generation I trio, the beasts find their master in Ho-Oh, who revived them when Ecruteak City's Brass Tower burned. They are said to embody the three events that happened to the tower: the lightning that struck the tower, the fire that burned in the tower, and the winds and rain that put it out. It is unknown whether these three were already a Suicune, Raikou, and Entei before they were revived, or whether Ho-Oh actually reincarnated them from three non-Legendary Pokemon.
Of the three beasts, Suicune finds the most independence, appearing as a game mascot on the box art of Crystal, and taking an expanded role in that game. Suicune also appears in Celebi: Voice of the Forest as a protagonist, while Entei was the first of the three to have a movie appearance (albeit as an illusion), in Spell of the Unown: Entei. Raikou was delegated to a more minor role, appearing as the central character in The Legend of Thunder!, where Jimmy encountered it. However, Misty's Togepi and a Houndoom did see the silhouette of a Raikou in Houndoom's Special Delivery.
The Legendary beasts made their first group appearance in the thirteenth movie, Zoroark: Master of Illusions, albeit in Shiny form. By transferring the Shiny Legendary beasts given away by promotional events to Pokemon Black and White, players are able to battle and capture the Pokemon Zoroark, who will transform to a member of this trio during the battle.
Unlike previous trios, the titans share very similar names, and their types are further estranged from the original Fire, Ice, and Electric that the birds take on (two of the beasts share types with the birds, while only one of the titans does). Like them, however, these three have a master (and like the beasts, a creator) in Regigigas. Also shared among the members of this trio is a weakness to Fighting-type moves.
Each has seven dots for eyes, arranged in a different pattern, similar to the braille that is connected to their legend. Unlike the birds and beasts, the titans do not have Pressure as their Ability, though they do share the Ability Clear Body. They are the slowest of all Legendary Pokemon.
In the anime and outside Lucario and the Mystery of Mew, they appeared as somewhat less important than the previous two trios, even being trained, in Poké Balls, no less, by Brandon, while the birds are said to cause a cataclysm if even one is captured (as happened in the second movie) and the beasts are unable to be captured by conventional means.
One of the many reasons why this trio is seen as "easily attainable" is because of the legends surrounding them. Long ago, Regigigas is said to have pulled the continents into place, and then created the three from an icy mountain, rocks, and magma in its image.
Regigigas was apparently worshiped at one time, alongside the other three, by ancient people. Due to it being so powerful, Regigigas was sealed away in the basement of the Snowpoint Temple, while the ones it created were spirited to the far-off Hoenn region and locked away in three stone structures, which were then sealed themselves. A message was left in braille to whomever would come to discover the Sealed Chamber, whose only access was via an underwater cavern, in the hopes that one day the Pokemon could be tamed.
Being the first Legendary trio, they set the standards for future trios; that is, they all share similar attributes and—in the case of most of the future trios—are considered equal among themselves. Like the other trios later would, the Legendary birds share a master in Lugia (in the anime and some games, at least), as well as two common traits: their Flying-type and their Ability, Pressure.
In the anime, Professor Oak states that Articuno and Moltres combined powers of ice and fire are the source and cradle of the oceans, and that Zapdos' electric energy creates the currents and streams, which is why the three ancient creatures are closely bound to the guardian of the ocean, Lugia.
The creation trio is a fan term used to refer to three powerful Legendary Pokemon of the Sinnoh region: Dialga, Palkia, and Giratina. Other fan terms include deity trio and dragon trio. According to Sinnoh myths, they were created by Arceus simultaneously when the universe began.
In Diamond, Pearl and Platinum only, Dialga and Palkia were referenced as "mythical Pokemon" with a lowercase M, seemingly a subset of rather than a distinct group from Legendary; it should be noted that this was prior to the use of the term Mythical with a capital M from Generation V and onwards, and was a translation of 神話のポケモン mythical Pokemon rather than 幻のポケモン Illusory Pokemon, the latter of which is referenced by the currently-used English term Mythical.
Much like members of other Legendary trios, the three Pokemon have similar appearances. Each has Dragon as their secondary type, as well as a base stat total of 680, divided among the stats as 150-120-120-100-100-90, in different orders.
Each of the members of this trio, including its trio master Arceus, have control over their own dimensions. Dialga controls time and Palkia controls space, two aspects of the four-dimensional universe that the Pokemon world, like our own, is a part of. Giratina has control over antimatter and the Distortion World, where time does not flow and space is unstable, while Arceus has its own world where the Hall of Origin is located.
The three members of this trio share the Ability Pressure, as well as the Hidden Ability Telepathy—however, Giratina's Origin Forme has Levitate. Likewise, the three are the game mascots of the three Generation IV Sinnoh-based games, and have similar level-up learnsets.
The creation trio makes another appearance in Pokemon HeartGold and SoulSilver. An event involving Cynthia and Arceus at the Sinjoh Ruins will allow a single one of the three to be obtained at level 1.
The three Pokemon could be references to the Biblical mythologies, Leviathan, a sea monster; Behemoth, a land beast; and Ziz, a giant bird, respectively. Also, their role as the guardian, as well as their respective types, are related to the elemental spheres; Kyogre being the hydrosphere, Groudon being the lithosphere, and Rayquaza being the atmosphere. These three members all appear to have similar physiology; identical signs on their body, as well as their yellow eyes.
In their reprised roles in the remakes of Pokemon Ruby and Sapphire, Pokemon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire, Groudon and Kyogre gained the ability to undergo Primal Reversion and Rayquaza the ability to Mega Evolve. Primal Reversion is said to be a process whereby the Pokemon return to their original power. Meanwhile, Rayquaza is said to be the first Pokemon to have Mega Evolved.
In their original appearance in Generation III, Groudon, Kyogre, and Rayquaza's weather-changing Abilities belonged exclusively to them. Though several non-Legendary Pokemon have other Abilities that can alter the weather, only Cloud Nine's effect overlaps with the effects of the trio's Abilities (with Rayquaza's Air Lock). Upon undergoing Primal Reversion or Mega Evolution, Groudon, Kyogre, and Rayquaza gain new exclusive Abilities, enhanced versions of their original Abilities.
Though moves such as Sunny Day and Rain Dance have acted just like Groudon's and Kyogre's Abilities since Generation II, causing the weather to change for only five turns, originally, Groudon's and Kyogre's Abilities caused their weather effect for the remainder of the battle or until the weather was changed again in some way. However, Primal Groudon and Primal Kyogre's new, enhanced Abilities render it impossible for the weather to be changed by most other means, though the effect lasts only as long as they remain in battle.
By contrast, Rayquaza's Ability—which removes the battle effects of any weather on the field, leaving only its visual effect—only lasts as long as Rayquaza remains active, as does Mega Rayquaza's enhanced version of the Ability.
Rayquaza, the trio master, was shown quelling a violent confrontation between the other two Pokemon during the events of Pokemon Emerald.
This, the Tao trio, and the Forces of Nature are the only Legendary trios whose members do not all have the same base stat total; Groudon and Kyogre share a total of 670, while Rayquaza's is 680. This fits with its role as a mediator between Groudon and Kyogre.
The lake guardians each live in the cavern at the center of one of Sinnoh's three commonly known lakes: Uxie resides in Acuity Cavern of Lake Acuity, Mesprit resides in Verity Cavern of Lake Verity, and Azelf resides Valor Cavern of Lake Valor. A secret fourth lake exists, but instead houses Turnback Cave, which contains a portal to the Distortion World and is thus often visited by Giratina.
In Pokemon Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum, Team Galactic attempts to capture all three of the lake guardians. Saturn goes to Lake Valor, where Team Galactic drains the lake by blowing it up with a Galactic Bomb. This is the lake the player must go to first. Despite losing to the player, Team Galactic still successfully captures Azelf. Over at Lake Verity, Mars is leading the operation and easily holding off Professor Rowan and Lucas/Dawn.
While the player again manages to defeat Mars, Team Galactic still successfully capture Mesprit. Finally, at Lake Acuity, by the time the player arrives, Jupiter has just defeated Barry and successfully captured Uxie.
When the player later storms Team Galactic HQ, it is discovered that Cyrus used the lake guardians to create the Red Chain so that he could control Dialga and/or Palkia. In Platinum, Cyrus then duplicates this Red Chain with his technology to create a second one, as he intends to control both Dialga and Palkia.
In Diamond and Pearl, the lake guardians come to the Spear Pillar when Cyrus summons DialgaD or PalkiaP and destroy the Red Chain he is using to control it, as their combined power is equal to that of one of the members of the creation trio. This prevents Cyrus from creating his new world without spirit. After doing so, they return to their lakes.
In Platinum, the lake guardians come to the Spear Pillar to attempt to balance out the power of Dialga and Palkia; however, the three lake guardians combined can only balance out one of the two, so they are overpowered. As a result, Giratina is angered by the dis-balance and is forced to merge the Distortion World with the real world at the Spear Pillar to prevent them from being destroyed. Cyrus, followed by the lake guardians, enter the Distortion World. Inside the Distortion World, the lake guardians assist the player with the Strength puzzle, then return to their lakes.
The three lake guardians are obtainable after the defeat of Team Galactic at Mt. Coronet. They each return to their lakes, and Uxie and Azelf can be caught in the caverns of their lakes; however, when encountering Mesprit in its cave, it flies off and roams the region.